If I asked you to make a list of the most successful digital marketing firms in the world. Amazon dot com, it's probably one of the first names that would come to mind. In fact, Amazon was one of the world's first e commerce companies, it was founded way back in 1994. Now since its founding, Amazon has experienced enormous growth and it's currently one of the world's largest retailers. In 2016, Amazon sales totaled $136 billion dollars and this number keeps growing. Amazon sells nearly everything but especially dominant in the book category. Today, nearly four out of every 10 books are sold by Amazon, as a result of Amazon success in the book market. Many in log based bookstores have suffered declining revenues and several bookstore chains have simply gone out of business.
Play video starting at :1:7 and follow transcript1:07
For example, in 2004 there were over 38,000 bookstores in the US. Today there are less than 23,000, that's nearly a 40 decline.
Play video starting at :1:21 and follow transcript1:21
So it's probably fair to say that digital book sellers such as Amazon are the enemies of the traditional analog bookstore. Given this rather adversary relationship, you may be surprised to learn that. Over the past year, Amazon has been establishing a retail outpost, a number of college bookstores across the US. In fact, there was one that recently opened right here at the University of Illinois at the Illini Union bookstore. Why would Alana bookstore welcome its biggest rival and allow her to set up shop inside its store?
Play video starting at :1:57 and follow transcript1:57
Could there be some possible synergies between the analog and the digital, to help answer these questions? We're here in front of the Illini Union bookstore. This store is located in the middle of our campus, a place where students come to buy their textbooks, or just relax with friends over a cup of coffee. We're going to speak with Jim Trail, Jim is the operations manager of the bookstore. We're going to ask him about the goal of this alliance with Amazon. And what sort of synergies he has seen between this merging of the analog and the digital. Let's go inside and see if you can find Jim. [MUSIC] Jim, thanks for joining us today. >> Not a problem. >> I'd like to ask you a few questions. What sort of services do you provide for the students, faculty and staff on campus? >> We are required by campus statue to carry all required and designated textbooks. So if a professor wants something as an optional course material, we do that, we provide obviously spirit gear for the campus. One of the things that we've been transitioning towards is our main level has really kind of converted into more of a service model. So we are the place that the university as a whole. All three campuses has a contract with PNC bank, so they are the official bank of the campus. Those people come here, we also have a partnership with my card. So if you need an ID or you need various other entry points, we work with icard, their location is in the back. A few years ago we entered into a contract with Starbucks, where we actually run the operation. We hire all the staff, we do the staff training, but we work at Starbucks standards. So, we don't really own it but we also don't, we're in a partnership with them. And then our latest model is of course the Amazon storage, which is another way we feel that we can help serve students better. Get them delivery of course materials in the quickest way possible. But also maybe alleviate some of the campus mail issues that come about with residents halls.
Play video starting at :4:2 and follow transcript4:02
Amazon has been developing this over the last few years, they've worked on several different campuses. One of the things that I think is kind of a misnomer as far as Amazon's business plan. Is that people assume that they're going to take over the campus bookstore, that's really not what they want. There are only two campuses where they do that. One is at U Mass, Amherst and one is that Purdue where there was on campus bookstore to start with. So those campuses felt, well this is a way to serve our students and also get an online presence in a lot. In most of the other ones, they are working as they work here, they come in and they acquire space. They tell us what they need, we tell them what we need out of this space. And we developed a partnership based on mutual benefit. Our main goal is really service to the students always. So, one of the things that we were able to get out of this contract. Is, we've been trying to get the funds together to do a major remodel on this building because it hasn't had one since 1994. Amazon is, we are paying Amazon back out of our agreements that they pay us. We have, they basically did the building for us. They contracted with the general contractor built to university standards. But we were able to pay for a major rebuild that we wouldn't have been able to afford without them.
Play video starting at :5:19 and follow transcript5:19
We have mutual reporting, so we talked to them about the textbooks that we order. They give us some insight on some of the things that are selling on their sites. And then we've actually brought in some new product lines and some other things that students have shown that they wanted through Amazon. So let's see what we can do, and Amazon has also increased their ability to do that. Amazon also enables the students here on this campus to get six months of Amazon Prime for free to start off with. And then it's $49 a year after that for the four years that they're in college.
Play video starting at :5:51 and follow transcript5:51
That enables them to get to this drop off site, where they have literally millions of products that they can get same day. If you order by 8 AM, it will be here by 5 PM. So, again, helping the students get maybe not class success. But also some food items, some dorm items, regular supplies that they would need, definitely a complimentary situation. Obviously, Amazon made their bones in selling books, so we know that that's there. It's a way to attract part of that, those dollars back to us. Some of the things that are interesting about the university campus. That are not really the same as some other large universities, is that academic freedom is extremely important to the professors here on this campus. And Amazon just can't source some of the books and haven't been able to get that. We can still do that because we've had such a long term relationship with them. I think that any time you have a new situation, there's a level of fear that you have with any business. That's coming into your location and wants to take your lunch money, so to speak. I haven't really felt that with Amazon when we've done it, but it's still obviously being a retailer, I'm in competition with them. I want to be able to do the best I can, so it's made us up our game. One of the things I do think is interesting is that, we have a similar customer base, but I don't think we have the same customer. What I mean by that is a lot of the Amazon customers are looking for the convenience items. They're looking for things that they can get to their dorm comfort items, were more of the nuts and bolts store. If they need specifics on a textbook where the people they come to, it gives us a chance to show up our expertise. I'll be honest, I've shop Amazon, I've done it every, I don't think there's a person probably in America as an Internet connection. Who hasn't at least been on the Amazon site looking for something that they can buy. If you can find a way to attract those dollars and then work your business into those areas. I don't see that, it's not beneficial to both sides.
Play video starting at :7:53 and follow transcript7:53
We just came back from the independent college bookstores association recently and this was the hot topic. This is what everyone was talking about because they are going to so many different locations. There is a level of fear, there's the idea of why would you do this though? As you said, the Wolf in the hen house idea. The issue is again, I think that you have to find out what you're comfortable with. If you are comfortable with staying as, as the bookstore on your campus and you believe that your model is the best. But I think that you need to do that. You need to reinforce that you need to, your customer better, nine times out of 10 than anybody who's go come in from the outside. But you also have to recognize the realities of the internet. We have a website, we have all the we've tried to innovate and we've tried to do these things. I don't begrudge Amazon their success in any way, and I don't think anyone on this campus does, they are good at what they do. I think I'm good at what I do, and I'm not sure that we're in the same, we're in the same business realm. But I don't think we're in the same business. One of the questions that was asked at the end of the discussion that my boss and one of the California stores, we brought them on campuses. If you knew then what, you know, now would you do it. For Todd and I it's an absolute yes, we would do that for some of the other managers. I don't know, I think they just haven't sorted it out exactly how they want to do things. I think that you have to be willing to adapt to the new situation.
Play video starting at :9:24 and follow transcript9:24
They can get everything from ramen to beard trimmers, [LAUGH] it's really an eclectic mix of what they can get. They can really, they can get anything that's on the Amazon site delivered here. They do have a narrower view of that, but it literally is still millions of products, so that they can get same day delivered. They are concentrating again on the dorm supplies, and the food, and the hot plate microwave or fan type of idea versus the larger versus books or things like that. So you can get anything delivered here that you would like. As long as they can hand it to you, if you can carry it out of the store, you can order a couch here, but you could order, cushions or pillows. One of the things that we got asked is, well, can I have it delivered here instead of my apartment? Absolutely, you can, and it is a more secure location. I think it's the wow factor really of them coming in, and because Amazon really does do a good job. You get to pick your window on when you're going to pick it up, they send you the contact information, say pick a time you go over, scan it locker pops open. It's amazing the smile that it makes on people's faces, when that locker pops open just from scanning your phone. The other thing that students really like is there returns, because really it is a painless process we've had. I've had to go through it a couple times where obviously you get something online. It's not everything that you expected it smaller, bigger, a dozen tool doesn't work the way you expect it to. You just bring it back to them, their packages up for you and you can, as long as you have the receipt, you can drop off the item. They'll put it in the box and put it on their truck and get it back to their location.
Play video starting at :10:59 and follow transcript10:59
It's absolutely critical, people vote with their feet. That's, that's something that I try and impress to all my staff and has been impressed me from the very beginning. If a person nine times out of 10 will not come and tell you that they have a complaint, they will not tell you they had a bad experience. They will not come back though. I try and go and I try and look at yelp every couple of days and I don't look at the good reviews. I always look at the bad reviews to see what they are, and then not to be big brother ish about it. But try and engage the customer in ways that to see how we can do better, how we failed them and admit that you failed them. If you admit that most people will give you a second chance, if you try and get defensive and say these kinds of things. Any kind of excuse, they will not be responsive to you and they won't come back, again. If you want someone to spend their dollars with you, people have hundreds of choices. People have Amazon, people have 100 different places, they have checked, they have all these other places that they can buy their books. That may be as good as us, but I think the 1-1 contact and being able to get people to come into your store on a regular basis. And feel comfortable working with you, and feel comfortable enough to tell you when you screwed up, I think that's invaluable. That's one of the things that Amazon does spectacularly well and then I think that most businesses should emulate. I'll be one of the first people to admit that I'm kind of a Luddite with things I prefer to go into stores. I don't better refer to spend a lot of time in stores, prefer to go in and get what I want and leave. And that's one of the things that I do like about Amazon site, is they do make it as easy as possible for you to get what you need and get on your way. I think you can do that in a physical space as well.
Play video starting at :12:44 and follow transcript12:44
We talked with Purdue, we talked with other people who have put the Amazon space in their bookstore and it's it really has been overall a win win it. Sometimes it's taken longer for people to see that benefit, but I think we've seen it right away. It's been a good experience for us, we're at bookstore dot Illinois dot e D U. That's our website and then Illinois dot amazon dot com, and then you can read about both. 
